--- Page 1 ---
KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 1
KITCHENER’S 2023-2026
STRATEGIC PLAN 
--- Page 2 ---
TERRITORIAL 
acknowledgement 
The City of Kitchener is situated on the traditional territory of the Neutral, Anishinaabeg and Haudenosaunee Peoples. We recognize our 
responsibility to serve as stewards for the land and honour the original caretakers who came before us. 
Our community is enriched by the enduring knowledge and deep-rooted traditions of the diverse First Nations, Métis and Inuit in Kitchener today. 
We give this acknowledgement to show respect to the first peoples who inhabited this land and to remind ourselv es of our responsibility to the 
First Nations, Inuit and Métis. 
OUR COMMITMENT TO RECONCILIATION 
The City is committed to responding in a meaningful way to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Calls to Action. We believe that this work begins 
with developing meaningful relationships with Indigenous communities and Rights Holders, and recognize that this work will take time, as we strive to 
deliver concrete actions. We look forward to supporting and celebrating Indigenous Peoples in Kitchener and working with others to provide important 
services through the actions embedded in the City’s Strategic Plan. 
2 
 KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026
KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 
 3 
--- Page 3 ---
KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 5 
A MESSAGE 
from Mayor Berry Vrbanovic and City Council 
Building a city for everyone where, together, we take care of the world around us – and each other. 
Welcome to Kitchener’s new 20-year vision and 2023 – 2026 strategic plan! 
As your Mayor and City Council, this plan reflects what you told us. It is a shared vision for our community and our Council ov er 
the next 20 years and a roadmap for this four-year term of Council. This plan reflects what will become our shared story , the story 
of Kitchener, from now until 2043. 
We would like to thank the many people who shaped these plans, including residents and businesses, advisory committees such 
as Compass Kitchener, and staff working at all levels of our organization. Through this process, we gathered public feedback 
through a telephone survey of more than 1,000 residents, conducted ‘street team’ interviews with dozens of people and drew 
online engagement from many more residents over the course of a year. For the first time, we ev en recruited 36 community-
spirited volunteers from diverse backgrounds and lived experiences to form a ‘Plan WITH Us’ resident panel. Over many months, 
so many of you helped us learn about the issues important to you, as you made meaningful contributions to this strategic plan. 
We believe there has never been a more exciting time to be part of Kitchener’s story. T ogether, we will work collaboratively with 
all of you to make our shared hopes, dreams and aspirations for our caring community, a continued reality. 
WARD 9 
Debbie Chapman 
WARD 1 
Scott Davey 
W
 ARD 2 
Dave Schnider 
WARD 6 
Paul Singh 
WARD 8 
Margaret Johnston 
MAYOR 
Berry Vrbanovic 
WARD 4 
Christine Michaud 
WARD 10 
Aislinn Clancy 
WARD 3 
Jason Deneault 
WARD 7 
Bil Ioannidis 
WARD 5 
Ayo Owodunni 
4 

--- Page 4 ---
KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 7 
United Nations 
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVEL PMENT Goals 
In 2015, world leaders from UN member states, including Canada, adopted the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and 17 Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) to end poverty, fight inequality, confront injustice and tackle climate 
change by 2030. 
The UN SDGs outline how to achieve a better and more sustainable future where no one 
is left behind. Based on leading global research, input from political representatives across 
the globe, hundreds of non-governmental organizations, and civil society - they identify key 
factors that contribute to prosperity, inclusion, and sustainability. 
The City of Kitchener is committed to supporting the implementation of the SDGs in Canada 
and internationally. The SDGs are global, but with a local lens, and we are doing our part to 
contribute to their success. All the SDGs have targets directly related to the responsibilities 
of local and regional governments through our delivery of direct programs and services. The 
five goal areas in this strategic plan support making local progress toward the SDGs. 
We will measure the economic, social, and environmental impacts of what we do as a city, and 
openly communicate progress aligned to the SDGs throughout the life of this strategic plan. 
Kitchener will submit this work and its outcomes to the Canadian government and the United 
Nations as a voluntary local review, which will assess and recognize progress in localizing the 
global SDG agenda and increase local innovation and dialogue around sustainability. 
6 
In 2023, the City opened a first-of-its-kind entrepreneurship hub to support businesses working to achieve the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) in meaningful ways. The SDG Idea Factory enables entrepreneurs, community leaders and like-minded individuals 
to innovate, collaborate and activate the 17 SDGs in ways that help build a stronger Kitchener, a stronger Canada, and a stronger planet. 
--- Page 5 ---
KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 9 
We are 
KITCHENER 
in 2043 
Whether you’ve lived in Kitchener your whole life, or you have just arrived, you belong 
here. Kitchener is a city of people who, since 1854, have worked together to chart a 
progressive future, building a thriving city that offers well-being, potential and quality 
of life – for everyone. 
We are Kitchener. A city where our neighbourhoods are more connected and diverse today 
than ever before. Our streets and sidewalks know all kinds of people, and our kitchen tables, 
meeting rooms and council chambers do, too. Our citizens connect and participate in civic 
life, bringing their diverse voices and lived experiences to those tables. Their participation has 
shown us new possibilities, helped us make better decisions, and pointed us toward solutions 
to some of our most challenging problems.  
We are Kitchener. One of Canada’s largest cities, and the place we call home. We have smart, 
sustainable, and innovative housing solutions to ensure that people have a place to call their 
own. In 2043, the city is filled with well-designed, adaptive reuses and new mixed-use, mixed-
income housing options as diverse as our neighbourhoods and the people who live in them.  
We are Kitchener. A city where our neighbourhoods are pedestrian-friendly and full of 
businesses and services that meet our daily needs. Our community centres, arenas, pools, 
libraries and sports fields are where we get together and get active. Our busy public parks and 
spaces have been designed with residents, for residents, so that they welcome and work for 
people of all ages and abilities. Full of people, activity and ideas, these spaces bring us together 
and offer access to knowledge and tools to learn about and thrive in the world around us.  
8 
--- Page 6 ---
10 KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 11 
We are Kitchener. Our public places and spaces bring us together 
and have reliable connections that enable us to move around 
the city in active, clean and accessible ways. Our sidewalks see 
community connection every day, as people walk, roll and wander 
– easily and safely getting where they want to go. We use cars and 
parking lots less and trails, cycling lanes and transit more. Fewer 
homes and businesses use fossil fuels to heat and cool, and we’ve 
reduced our impact on the environment, by using more renewable 
energy. Consistent awareness and incentives have made climate 
responsibility second nature for residents and businesses.  
We are Kitchener. T ogether, we serve as stewards of the natural 
environment, and remain steadfast in our commitment to 
reconciliation, honouring the Indigenous caretakers who came 
before us. We have strong relations with the First Nations, Métis 
and Inuit who call Kitchener home. We preserve and protect 
parks and natural areas. Our urban forests and our tree canopy 
soften the boundaries between the built and natural worlds. They 
are the natural backdrop along our streets, sidewalks and paths, 
and to the arts and cultural experiences, events and exhibitions 
that we enjoy. Every time we leave home, we enjoy the cool 
shade of these investments.  
We are Kitchener. A city that has invested in creating an agile 
and innovative local economy. A city that has strengthened key 
industries and kept our job market healthy and diverse. We 
support local businesses to continue to adapt and lead, addressing 
their challenges and helping them connect and work together. 
Our city’s difference-makers – the talented and resourceful 
entrepreneurs, workers and artists, whose innovative approaches 
reflect their pursuit of building a better world – continue to 
diversify and grow our economy and create jobs for everyone.  
We are Kitchener. A city of people who help and care for one 
another. Our city government works together and with community 
partners, to offer accessible services and address disparities 
among communities of greatest need. Our programs are open 
to everyone with equal access for all, without financial or other 
barriers. Because of our work, more people than ever feel a deep 
sense of belonging in Kitchener.  
We are Kitchener. The public servants who work alongside our 
residents and businesses to make a difference. We listen, and 
are stewards of our City’s present and its future. We champion 
collective goals and work with residents to build our city, one 
neighbourhood at a time. We invite civic action on the issues that 
matter to residents. We help make decisions, and are accountable. 
We measure the right things, and report on our progress. Our 
legacy reflects a diverse and caring workforce that mirrors the 
diverse and caring city we’ve helped to build. 
As part of #T eamKitchener, we’ve built trust with residents, and 
because of this, people from diverse backgrounds vote and take 
part in public processes in unmatched numbers. We tell stories 
of the challenges we came together to face over the years, 
and of how doing so led to a greater understanding of what 
we share and what makes us unique. By working together and 
making the most of our differences, residents have helped staff 
remove barriers, giving more people the opportunity to thrive 
in Kitchener.  
We are Kitchener.  It’s 2043. We continue to build a city for 
everyone where, together, we take care of the world around us 
– and each other. The lessons of our past – and the promise of 
tomorrow – remind us that people who love their city can always 
change it, and our world, for the better. T ogether. 

--- Page 7 ---
Achieving our vision starts with the pursuit of the goals identified within the 2023-2026 Str ategic Plan. 
Developed through unprecedented consultation, exploration and working alongside members of our community, our 
goals through the life of this plan are to build a connected city; cultivate a green city; create an economically thriving 
city; foster a caring city and, as city employees, steward a better city.  
This plan is a guide to keep Council and city staff aligned with the community’s priorities. It serves as the foundation 
for the city’s strategies, actions and initiatives and ensures the alignment of projects and work conducted across the 
corporation’s many departments and divisions. 
12 13 KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 
Kitchener’s 
VISION 
for 2043 
Building a city for everyone where, together, 
we take care of the world around us – and each other. 
--- Page 8 ---
Building a 
CONNECTED 
CIT Y together 
We live in all kinds of neighbourhoods and types of housing. 
We work together to ensure that we each have secure and affordable homes. 
We get around easily, sustainably and safely to the places and spaces that matter 
most to us. 
• Housing For All implementation   
• Localized Transportation Safety 
Improvement Program  
• City-wide Active Transportation 
routes   
• Official Plan comprehensive update  
14 15 KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 

--- Page 9 ---
KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 17 
Cultivating a 
GREEN 
CITY together 
We follow a sustainable path to a greener, healthier city. 
We work together to enhance and protect our parks and natural environment 
while transitioning to a low-carbon future. We support businesses and residents 
to make more climate-positive choices. 
• Corporate Climate Action Plan 2.0   
• Clean energy transition strategy 
• District energy business case 
• Green development standards 
• Implement tree canopy target plan   
• Implementing actions from parks 
 master plan  
• Parkland acquisition strategy  
• Grand River park strategy   
16 
--- Page 10 ---
18 
Creating an 
ECONOMICALL Y-
THRIVING CITY 
together 
We use our collective strengths to grow an agile and diverse local economy 
powered by talented entrepreneurs, workers and artists. We work together 
to create opportunities for everyone and a resilient future that propels our 
city forward. 
• Accelerate commercial business 
approvals  
• Implement health/medical 
technology innovation campus   
• Develop a creative industries school  
• Create a strategy for events and 
festivals   
• Implement an entertainment venue 
management structure  
• Create a new arts and culture 
master plan   
KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 19 

--- Page 11 ---
20 
Fostering a 
CARING 
CIT Y together 
We welcome residents of all ages, backgrounds and lived experiences. We work 
together on the decisions that matter to us and have a meaningful influence in 
our community. We’re healthy and thriving as we easily access the diverse and 
inclusive programs and services we need to succeed. 
• Advance truth and reconciliation  
• Municipal newcomers strategy  
• Enhance city’s engagement practices   
• Community centre operating model  
• City-led recreation and leisure 
program review 
• Leisure facilities master plan update  
• Community grants review 
21 KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 

--- Page 12 ---
23 KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 22 
Stewarding a 
BET TER 
CIT Y together 
We, the City’s employees, are stewards of Kitchener’s present and its future. 
We’re responsive, innovative, diverse and accountable public servants who work 
together efficiently to serve residents. We remove barriers and champion residents’ 
collective vision for a better city and a better world. 
• Digital Kitchener strategy  
• Implement city-wide 
data strategy 
• Strengthen employer identity/ 
value proposition   
• Support a psychologically 
safe workplace 
• Procurement innovation 

--- Page 13 ---
25 KITCHENER’S STRATEGIC PLAN  2023-2026 24 
OUR COMMITMENT 
 to accountability 
As public servants in leadership roles at the City of Kitchener, we are accountable to the community we serve. 
The 2023-2026 Strategic Plan is a reflection of significant feedback from citizens. The community’s priorities are 
our priorities.   
As we work together toward building a city for everyone where, together, we take care of the world around us – 
and each other, the city’s Corporate Leadership T eam commits to be accountable for progress towards the strategic 
plan’s goals and to regularly report our progress. 
T o support this commitment to accountability, the following principles will guide the work we undertake to support 
making meaningful progress; equity, diversity, inclusion and accessibility; strong relationships with the community and 
partners; and innovation as an enabler of success. 
The city’s Compass Kitchener Citizen Advisory Committee will review and assess our progress and will report publicly 
each year on how well we are doing. 
We are taking an adaptive approach to setting actions for this strategic plan in order to better respond to emerging 
communit y need s and opportunitie s over the 4-yea r period. While we have identified initial actions to tak e in its 
first years, the plan is a living document rooted firmly in community goals yet offering flexibility for the future actions 
available to us.  
Chief 
Administrative 
Officer 
Dan Chapman 
General Manager, 
Infrastructure 
Services 
Denise McGoldrick 
General Manager, 
Development 
Services 
Justin Readman 
General Manager, 
Corporate 
Services 
Victoria Raab 
Chief 
Financial 
Officer 
Jonathan Lautenbach 
General Manager, 
Community Services 
and Deputy CA
O 
Michael May 
--- Page 14 ---
26
KITCHENER’S 2023-2026 
STRATEGIC PLAN 
200 King Street W •  Kitchener, ON •  N2G 4G7 kitchener.ca/ourp lan 
