--- Page 1 ---
City of Waterloo Strategic Plan / 2023-2026
Strong, 
Sustainable, 
Together.

--- Page 2 ---
Photo: Don Graham
Waterloo is situated on the land 
traditionally cared for by the 
Haudenosaunee, Anishnaabe and 
Neutral Peoples. We acknowledge 
the enduring presence and 
deep traditional knowledge and 
philosophies of the Indigenous 
People with whom we share this 
land today.
--- Page 3 ---
Contents
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Executive Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Our Strategic Plan 2023–2026  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Project Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Corporate Vision and Mission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Guiding Principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Strategic Priorities   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Strategic Priority 1: Reconciliation, Equity, Accessibility, Diversity and Inclusion   . . . . 15
Strategic Priority 2: Environmental Sustainability and Climate Action   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Strategic Priority 3: Complete Community  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Strategic Priority 4: Infrastructure and Transportation Systems   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Strategic Priority 5: Innovation and Future-Ready  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Performance Measurement   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
--- Page 4 ---
Introduction
Situated in Southwestern Ontario, with a 
population of 147,350 (2021) the City of 
Waterloo (“Waterloo”) is located in one of the 
fastest growing regions in Canada in terms of 
both population and employment. Home to three 
leading post-secondary institutions, it attracts 
some of the best and brightest talent from 
Canada and around the world. Many people have 
chosen Waterloo as a place to live, work, play and 
learn as it offers a harmonious balance of open 
space, amenities, employment opportunities and a 
vibrant uptown. However, Waterloo has emerged 
from the peak of the Covid-19 global pandemic 
a changed city.
As the city moved through the height of the 
pandemic, urgent issues such as declining housing 
affordability, growing awareness related to 
Reconciliation, equity, accessibility, diversity and 
inclusion and the increasing urgency for action 
to address climate change continued to emerge. 
Waterloo has already taken significant steps to try 
and address these challenges with the approval 
of its first Affordable Housing Strategy, the 
declaration of a climate emergency in November 
2019, subsequent adoption of ambitious 
greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets of 
50% by 2030 and 80% by 2050 and the creation 
of an internal staff team that is enabling the City 
to address Reconciliation, equity, accessibility, 
diversity and inclusion within the corporation 
and the community. At the same time, Waterloo 
has recognized the importance of growing a 
diversified economy, providing its residents with 
a complete community that includes resilient 
infrastructure and access to safe, sustainable 
transportation solutions.
There is more that needs to be done and 
Waterloo has committed itself to an equitable 
pandemic recovery so that the City can face 
these challenges with a fully engaged community. 
Waterloo is working to identify a new path 
forward to address the challenges ahead 
and position itself to be future-ready. The 
development of a new strategic plan is an essential 
requirement in this process, as it will provide a 
guide for this new path, which will be based on 
equity and inclusion and will foster a sense of 
belonging for the whole community.
--- Page 5 ---
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 5
Executive Summary
The City of Waterloo follows a hybrid approach 
to strategic planning. The strategic plan is for the 
City of Waterloo and for the community. As a 
result, it was important that the development 
of the strategic plan consisted of a balanced 
approach. The process to develop the new 
strategic plan is rooted in deep and meaningful 
engagement. The plan itself includes a strong 
framework that will enable the City and the 
community to work together to address the 
challenges of today while preparing us to be 
future-ready to face the challenges of tomorrow.
The strategic plan serves as a roadmap for the 
new term of Council to guide decisions, planning 
and budgeting for the next four years. The 
2023-2026 Strategic Plan, when implemented, 
will enable Council and staff to advance City 
and community priorities, strengthen municipal 
operations, allocate resources effectively and 
achieve desired outcomes.
The strategy development was designed to 
be comprehensive, inclusive and transparent. 
Engagement was completed over the course 
of a six-month period and included connecting 
with Council, staff and the community with a 
heightened focus on equity-deserving groups. 
Community consultations offered local partners 
and residents the opportunity to share 
experiences, knowledge and aspirations.
In addition to engagement, the strategic planning 
process included a review of key plans and 
strategies, the development of a community 
profile based on a variety of socio-economic 
factors and demographic data and a review of the 
current community context that was not reflected 
in the City’s policy framework. Challenges such as 
COVID recovery, housing and homelessness and 
the urgency of sustainability and climate change 
are current issues that needed to be considered 
as part of the process.
Specific ideas for shaping the strategic plan were 
supplied via 26 one-on-one community and 
partner interviews, with more than 500 survey 
responses in the Municipal Service Satisfaction 
Assessment (MSSA), 340 responses to the Engage 
Waterloo online survey, a number of community 
workshops involving nearly 300 participants, a 
free community skate aimed at engaging youth 
and community intercept interviews that were 
held to survey older adults.
The City of Waterloo led a series of community 
engagement initiatives to ensure the priorities 
of equity-deserving groups were integrated in 
the development of the City’s strategic plan. 
In total, more than 300 children, youth and 
adults participated in these focused community 
engagement efforts. These efforts included 50 
responses to a tailored survey, eight community 
workshops involving 240 community members 
and several one-on-one interviews.
Council also provided meaningful input to the 
process, reflecting on the observations shared 
and providing leadership and direction to narrow 
the focus. City of Waterloo leadership also 
participated by providing important insights 
on the vision, mission, guiding principles and 
strategic priorities. Staff participated in a survey 
that focused on identifying ways to recognize the 
hard work involved in implementing the strategic 
plan and identifying things that the City can do to 
better communicate the work that the City does. 
There were also regular updates on the progress 
of the plan throughout the process.
As a result of the process, a series of foundational 
statements, strategic priorities, objectives and 
actions were prepared. The pages that follow 
reflect the ambitions and aspirations of Council, 
staff and the community.
--- Page 6 ---
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: OUR STRATEGIC PLAN 2023 – 2026 6
Our Strategic Plan 2023–2026
Vision
A leader in sustainability and a 
future-ready community for all
The City’s new vision statement 
showcases a positive perspective 
on the future, telegraphing hope 
and optimism.
Mission
T o actively engage, collaborate 
with and respond to 
Waterloo’s diverse community 
through bold leadership, 
empathy and accountability
The City’s mission statement 
explains the municipality’s reason 
for being.
Guiding Principles
The City’s Guiding Principles serve as a lens 
through which all decisions are evaluated. They 
represent the values of the municipal corporation.
Equity and Inclusion
We build relationships with First Nations, Métis 
and Inuit Peoples and equity-deserving groups 
and embrace Reconciliation, equity, accessibility, 
diversity and inclusion.
Sustainability
We plan for the long term, prioritizing 
sustainability, and take meaningful action to address 
environmental, social and economic goals.
Integrity
We operate with integrity and transparency and 
we strive for well-considered comprehensive, 
responsive, diligent and thoughtful decision-making.
Workplace Wellbeing
We commit to promoting wellbeing and providing 
a healthy, safe and enjoyable work environment for 
all employees and volunteers of the organization.
Community-centred
We support strong and liveable neighbourhoods, 
prioritizing community engagement grounded in 
empathy and understanding.
Operational Excellence
We provide fiscally responsible, exceptional service 
that meets the needs of residents, partners and 
equity-deserving groups, employees and volunteers 
of the City.
Strategic Priorities
The collective input from Council, leadership, 
staff and the community helped to identify five 
Strategic Priorities to be addressed over the next 
four years. The following themes are grounded in 
a collaborative corporate culture, upon which the 
Strategic Plan is built:
■ Reconciliation, Equity, Accessibility, 
Div
ersity and Inclusion
■ Environmental Sustainability and 
Climate Ac
tion
■ Complete Community
■ Infrastructure and Transportation Systems
■ Innovation and Future-Ready
Objectives and Actions
The City further developed 17 Strategic Objectives 
based on the strategic priorities, focusing on the 
City’s ability to influence change. Actions are outlined 
under the objectives. Each action has been tailored 
with input from the City to encompass a breadth of 
issues to be further addressed in separate department 
and division business plans and other strategies and 
initiatives.
The strategic plan will form the foundation for day-to-
day decision-making by City of Waterloo Council and 
staff, informing budget processes and business planning 
in the years to come. The 2023-2026 strategic plan 
was developed through an extensive community 
engagement and strategic planning process involving 
information sharing and conversations with Council, 
staff and the community.
--- Page 7 ---
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: PROJECT OVERVIEW 7
Project Overview
The engagement approach 
used to develop this strategy 
involved Council, staff and the 
community with a focus on 
equity-deserving groups. The 
process also looked at the internal 
City structure and considered 
the interconnectedness among 
and between departments and 
divisions and enhanced the 
understanding about roles in 
relation to the organization’s 
strategic direction. External 
engagement included key 
partners from business and 
industry, education, other levels 
of government and a variety of 
sectors.
Approach
The planning approach was to divide this project 
into four phases.
Phase 1: 
Project Initiation
The project started with the Consulting T eam 
meeting with the City of Waterloo to develop a 
common understanding of goals and objectives 
and to identify background documents, reports 
and strategies for review. This project phase set 
the stage for clear and consistent communication 
between all relevant parties.
Phase 2: 
Scan and Engagement
The Consulting T eam undertook a series of scans 
of other relevant strategies and community, 
employment and business demographics and 
then established a scan report that reflected key 
learnings from the analysis process. Details of 
the scan report were presented as a separate 
report and are included in the next section. The 
scan report included summaries of engagement 
completed by both the Consultant and the City 
of Waterloo and provided additional context of 
the strengths, opportunities and desires of the 
residents of Waterloo.
Phase 3: 
Draft Strategic Plan
Community engagement including surveys, 
discussions and workshops were facilitated 
from November 2022 through April 2023. All 
comments received were captured and integrated 
into a draft strategic plan. A working draft of 
the strategic plan including all key components 
was developed. This document served as an 
input platform with leadership, Council, partners 
and collaborating organizations. The reporting 
framework will be based on the strategic 
priorities, goals and actions and will be developed 
as part of implementation.
Phase 4: 
Final Plan and 
Implementation Measures
The draft strategic plan was presented to Council 
in May 2023. Once the draft was presented, the 
City sought feedback regarding the draft strategy 
from Council and the public over several weeks. 
The feedback was then incorporated into this final 
version of the strategic plan.
The final strategic plan was presented to Council 
by the Project Lead and Staff Lead in June 
2023. The presentation highlighted the core 
elements of the strategic plan and emphasized 
the important contributions of the internal 
and external engagement processes. With the 
approval of the strategic plan, the project moves 
to implementation, which will focus on ongoing 
conversations within the City and the community.
--- Page 8 ---
Vision
A leader in 
sustainability and 
a future-ready 
community for all
Mission
T o actively engage, 
collaborate with 
and respond to 
Waterloo’s diverse 
community through 
bold leadership, 
empathy and 
accountability
--- Page 9 ---
CORPORATE VISION AND MISSION 9
Vision Statement
The vision statement for an organization is an 
aspirational description of what the community 
would like to achieve or accomplish in the mid to 
long-term future. It provides the foundation for 
how to get there through future actions.
A leader in sustainability and a 
future-ready community for all
What does it mean? 
Residents of Waterloo and community leadership 
have emphasized a focus on sustainability and 
climate leadership as a primary driver for the 
strategic plan. This was reflected through 
engagement including the Municipal Services 
Satisfaction Assessment (MSSA) and workshops 
with Council and leadership. The vision evokes 
optimism for the future and a long-term approach 
to decision-making. Waterloo is also known as an 
innovative, well-educated community that focuses 
on doing things differently. The vision closes with 
the addition of ‘for all’ to ensure the strength of 
Waterloo’s commitment to building an equitable 
and inclusive community for everyone.
Mission Statement
The mission statement for an organization 
outlines its reasons for being. It answers the 
following questions: What is the organization? 
Why does it exist? Who are the primary 
customers? What are the products and services?
T o actively engage, collaborate 
with and respond to Waterloo’s 
diverse community through 
bold leadership, empathy and 
accountability
What does it mean?  
City of Waterloo staff are dedicated to 
delivering service excellence, strive for boldness 
and complete work that is meaningful to the 
community. The City of Waterloo remains 
committed to bold decision-making and delivering 
programs and services in a way that engages 
residents and responds to the perspectives of 
all in the community. The City will continue to 
respond to the needs of the community while 
also remaining accountable for the decisions that 
are made.
Corporate Vision and Mission
--- Page 10 ---
Guiding principles
Equity and inclusion
Sustainability
Integrity
Workplace wellbeing
Community-centred
Operational 
excellence

--- Page 11 ---
GUIDING PRINCIPLES 11
Guiding Principles
Guiding principles encompass the 
values of the community and the 
municipal corporation. 
They guide the decisions of the 
organization and outline expected 
behaviours of its employees and 
leaders. These principles help 
guide interactions with internal 
and external customers and 
should be considered with every 
decision made. They support the 
development of a culture where 
everyone understands what is 
important.
Equity and Inclusion
We build relationships with First Nations, Métis 
and Inuit Peoples and equity-deserving groups 
and embrace Reconciliation, equity, accessibility, 
diversity and inclusion.
Sustainability
We plan for the long term, prioritizing 
sustainability, and take meaningful action to 
address environmental, social and economic goals.
Integrity
We operate with integrity and transparency 
and we strive for well-considered comprehensive, 
responsive, diligent and thoughtful 
decision-making.
Workplace Wellbeing
We commit to promoting wellbeing and 
providing a healthy, safe and enjoyable work 
environment for all employees and volunteers of 
the organization.
Community-centred
We support strong and liveable neighbourhoods, 
prioritizing community engagement grounded in 
empathy and understanding.
Operational Excellence
We provide fiscally responsible, exceptional 
service that meets the needs of residents, 
partners and equity-deserving groups, employees 
and volunteers of the City.
--- Page 12 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES 12
Strategic Priorities
While the vision, mission and 
guiding principles outline where 
Waterloo wants to be, why the 
City does what it does and how 
it will accomplish the work, the 
strategic priorities will start to 
prioritize the direction the City 
needs to go.
These directions are generally broader themes 
and will help guide departmental planning and 
future decision-making. These directions will be 
used as a foundation for goals and objectives 
as well as mapping out deliverables and 
performance metrics throughout all municipal 
planning processes. These strategic priorities are 
designed to be interconnected and work together. 
Actions identified for a strategic priority may 
support the outcomes of another and should be 
interpreted holistically.
Reconciliation, Equity, 
Accessibility, Diversity 
and Inclusion
Value that an inclusive city is one that recognizes 
differences and diversity in planning, decision-
making and service delivery for all residents to 
have equal opportunities and benefits. Through 
a commitment to Reconciliation, justice, equity 
and inclusion for all, the City will disrupt and 
dismantle all forms of discrimination and 
systemic oppression.
Environmental Sustainability 
and Climate Action
Become a leader in environmental sustainability 
practices and climate action by making 
transformational changes related to City 
operations and services while working with the 
community towards climate change mitigation and 
adaptation goals.
Complete Community
Achieve a high quality of life for all residents 
and overall community vibrancy through 
strategic density, diverse housing options and 
equitably available parks, public spaces and other 
recreational and cultural amenities.
Infrastructure and 
Transportation Systems
Expand and support infrastructure and 
transportation systems in an environmentally and 
fiscally sustainable manner that provides residents 
with resilient public infrastructure and sustainable 
transportation solutions.
Innovation and Future-Ready
Demonstrate resiliency and readiness to do 
things differently, address social developments and 
integrate new ideas through collaboration with 
key partners while continuing to grow a diversified 
economy and innovation ecosystem.
--- Page 13 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 13
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals
The vision, mission and guiding 
principles of the strategic plan 
set out the desired future of 
Waterloo, while the strategic 
priorities connect the actions with 
the strategic direction and set 
associated goals to track progress 
over the period of the strategy.
The City of Waterloo strives to be a leader in 
sustainability and for future-readiness, to be 
prepared for the challenges ahead whether 
known or unknown. The next portion of the 
strategic plan outlines the strategic priorities, 
goals and objectives that align with the vision. 
Measuring these goals and objectives will ensure 
accountability and awareness of the community’s 
progress and achievements.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
adopted by the United Nations in 2015, provides 
a shared blueprint for prosperity for people and 
the planet, now and into the future. 
At its heart are the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs
), which are an urgent call for action. 
The UN’s Department of Economic and Social
Affairs emphasizes that the principle of “think 
globally, act loc
ally” is essential and action at the 
local level by local governments is a critical part of 
achieving the SDGs. The figure below showcases 
all 17 SDGs for reference.
The City of Waterloo is in alignment with a focus 
on economic, social and environmental impacts 
and the strategic plan goals have been linked 
back to the SDGs. This will strengthen the City’s 
ongoing work with respect to the localization of 
the SDGs.
Sustainable development goals
1. No poverty 
2. Zero hunger 
3. Good health and well-being
4. Quality education 
5. Gender equality 
6. Clean water and sanitation 
7. Affordable and clean energy
8. Decent work and economic growth
9. Industry, innovation and infrastructure 
10. Reduced inequalities 
11. Sustainable cities and communities 
12. Responsible consumption and production 
13. Climate action 
14. Life below water 
15. Life on land 
16. Peace, justice and strong institutions
17. Partnerships for the goals 
--- Page 14 ---
Strategic Priority 1
Reconciliation, 
Equity, Accessibility, 
Diversity and 
Inclusion

--- Page 15 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 1: RECONCILIATION, EQUITY, ACCESSIBILITY, DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION 15
Strategic Priority 1
Reconciliation, Equity, Accessibility, 
Diversity and Inclusion
Value that an inclusive city is one 
that recognizes differences and 
diversity in planning, decision-
making and service delivery 
for all residents to have equal 
opportunities and benefits. 
Through a commitment to 
Reconciliation, justice, equity 
and inclusion for all, the City will 
disrupt and dismantle all forms 
of discrimination and systemic 
oppression.
Objective 1 
Invest in accessibility and inclusion to enhance belonging
■ Leverage the Accessibility and Inclusion 
Review to create an action-oriented Multi-Year 
Accessibility Plan.
■ Suppor
t an enhanced sense of belonging 
within all City buildings, operations and service 
delivery in ways that strengthen relationships 
with and within equity-deserving groups.
■ Prioritiz
e the intersectional needs of youth, 
older adults, women, faith communities, 
people with disabilities, racialized peoples, 
Indigenous peoples, people living on low 
incomes, newcomers and 2SLGBTQ+ through 
inclusive and culturally responsive programs, 
services, policies, funding and communication 
strategies.
■ Pr
oactively respond to identity-based 
discrimination protected under the Ontario 
Human Rights Code including, but not limited 
to, ableism, ageism, homophobia, queerphobia 
and transphobia, and sexism.
--- Page 16 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 1: RECONCILIATION, EQUITY, ACCESSIBILITY, DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION 16
Objective 2
Embed Reconciliation, equity, accessibility, 
diversity and inclusion across the organization
■ Advance community priorities by developing 
and strengthening relationships with equity-
deserving groups outside of the organization 
and take action on their priorities.
■ St
rengthen alliances with support/service 
organizations to foster system action.
■ Incorporate R econciliation, equity, accessibility, 
diversity and inclusion into the organization’s 
policies and practices so that gains achieved 
are enduring and meaningful across time.
■ Implement account
 ability structures so 
that the organization is required to take 
action on disparities that detail inequities for 
equity-deserving groups.
■ Inf
orm decision-making across the organization 
and review all relevant corporate policies, 
programs and services using equity and 
Reconciliation frameworks with a restorative 
justice approach.
■ Become munic
 ipal leaders in accessibility and 
inclusion practices by exceeding minimum 
Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities 
Act, 2005 (AODA) standards. 
■ Collec
t data to measure disparity and 
disproportionality within the organization and 
in the community. Where possible, contribute 
to data collection of external organizations in 
meaningful ways.
Objective 3
Advance Reconciliation
■ Respond to the 94 Truth and Reconciliation 
Calls to Action, the Missing and Murdered 
Indigenous Women and Girls Calls to Justice 
and the United Nations Declaration of the 
Rights of Indigenous People.
■ St
rengthen the City’s leadership in 
Reconciliation through becoming trustworthy 
partners with Indigenous Leaders and their 
respective communities.
Objective 4 
Action anti-racism
■ Proactively respond to identity-based hate 
including, but not limited to, antisemitism, 
islamophobia, anti-Black racism, anti-Indigenous 
racism and additional forms of identity-based 
violence.
--- Page 17 ---
Strategic Priority 2 
Environmental 
Sustainability 
and Climate Action
--- Page 18 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 2: ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY AND CLIMATE ACTION 18
Strategic Priority 2 
Environmental Sustainability and Climate Action
Become a leader in 
environmental sustainability 
practices and climate action by 
making transformational changes 
related to City operations 
and services while working 
with the community towards 
climate change mitigation and 
adaptation goals.
Objective 1
Climate leadership
■ Work together with organizational and 
community champions to align activities 
and achieve climate action mitigation and 
adaptation goals to create a more resilient 
community.
■ Continue to w
 ork towards the City’s 
corporate greenhouse gas emission reduction 
goals through the continued electrification of 
our fleet, low carbon retrofitting of existing 
facilities and adherence to low-carbon ready 
new construction.
■ Utiliz
e our data-driven solutions to address 
present and historical impacts of climate 
change for impacted communities.
■ In
vest in public open spaces and naturalization 
efforts to preserve and enhance the natural 
ecosystems in the city.
Objective 2
Environmentally 
sustainable economy
■ Encourage and cultivate environmentally 
sustainable development practices including 
implementation of the environmental 
sustainability standards for Generation Park 
Waterloo.
Objective 3
Environmental 
sustainability mindset
■ Embed environmental sustainability into 
internal operational decision-making 
and evaluate operational decisions with 
consideration for the City’s greenhouse gas 
mitigation and adaptation goals.
■ St
rengthen education and awareness regarding 
climate change mitigation and adaptation 
actions within the City and the community to 
advance climate action goals.
--- Page 19 ---
Strategic Priority 3
Complete 
Community
--- Page 20 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 3: COMPLETE COMMUNITY 20
Strategic Priority 3 
Complete Community
Achieve a high quality of life for all 
residents and overall community 
vibrancy through strategic density, 
diverse housing options and 
equitably available parks, public 
spaces and other recreational and 
cultural amenities.
Objective 1 
Invest in arts experiences
■ Invest in arts events and experiences in the 
city, celebrating diversity and uplifting diverse 
communities.
■ Adva
nce the Museum Strategy to maintain 
and create safe and vibrant public spaces that 
will promote opportunities for diverse use 
including investigating future space needs for 
the City of Waterloo Museum.
Objective 2 
Vibrant public spaces
■ Leverage investments in community services 
and infrastructure to comprehensively plan for 
context-sensitive intensification.
■ Commit to a
 nd plan for built environments 
that reduce reliance on automobiles.
■ Pla n for welcoming, inclusive and accessible 
spaces.
Objective 3 
Complete neighbourhoods
■ Support the Region of Waterloo and 
collaborate with area municipalities and 
community partners on housing initiatives in 
our community including homelessness.
■ Implement t
 he Affordable Housing 
Strategy to increase the supply and mix of 
affordable housing.
■ Ca
rry out and monitor the City’s Housing 
Pledge, planning for 16,000 new residential 
units by 2031.
■ Continue to implement a
 nd revise the 
Neighbourhood Strategy to improve 
neighbourhood interaction, safety and 
relationships; promote the Neighbourhood 
Matching Fund and develop plans for age-
friendly initiatives in support of the City’s 
membership in the Global Network of Age-
friendly Cities and Communities.
Objective 4
Actions to meet community needs
■ Optimize the use of City-owned lands to 
achieve strategic objectives.
■ Ensur e community amenities and facilities 
are welcoming and accessible to all residents 
across the community.
■ R
enew the Community Grants Program in 
order to improve the grant structure and 
process, with an emphasis on the changing 
needs and priorities of the community for the 
greatest impact.
■ De
velop new program opportunities that offer 
a variety of accessible and inclusive services, 
programs and amenities that meet the diverse 
needs of the community at large.
--- Page 21 ---
Strategic Priority 4
Infrastructure and 
Transportation 
Systems
--- Page 22 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 4: INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 22
Strategic Priority 4 
Infrastructure and Transportation Systems
Expand and support infrastructure 
and transportation systems in 
an environmentally and fiscally 
sustainable manner that provides 
residents with resilient public 
infrastructure and sustainable 
transportation solutions.
Objective 1
Sustainable infrastructure planning
■ Prioritize environmentally sustainable 
infrastructure development to improve 
infrastructure resilience in order to meet the 
needs of future generations.
■ A
ssess and address the infrastructure gap.
■ Identif y and plan for required operational, 
maintenance and rehabilitation/replacement 
needs associated with new and existing 
infrastructure while considering ways to 
minimize the impacts of life cycle costs.
■ Cons
truct, upgrade and manage essential 
infrastructure for indoor and outdoor facilities, 
water, wastewater, stormwater, underground 
utilities and other municipal assets to support 
the long-term needs of the community and 
natural environment.
Objective 2
Mobility and a connected 
community
■ Continue to further Vision Zero, a strategy to 
eliminate traffic fatalities and severe injuries, 
while increasing safe, healthy, equitable mobility 
for all.
■ E
xpand year-round transportation systems to 
increase connectivity and availability of travel 
options across socio-economic communities 
and for persons with disabilities.
■ Enha
nce connections and linkages with 
external transit systems to support commuting 
and recreational travel throughout the 
region and the province while strengthening 
connections to airports.
Objective 3
Investment in active transportation
■ Expand the City’s active transportation 
network to increase community connections 
and mobility for all.
■ E
xplore ways to improve safety of cycling 
lanes and pedestrian connections to increase 
wider utilization.
--- Page 23 ---
Strategic Priority 5
Innovation and 
Future-Ready
Strategic Priority 5
Innovation and 
Future-Ready
--- Page 24 ---
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 5: INNOVATION AND FUTURE-READY 24
Strategic Priority 5 
Innovation and Future-Ready
Demonstrate resiliency and 
readiness to do things differently, 
address social developments 
and integrate new ideas 
through collaboration with key 
partners while continuing to 
grow a diversified economy and 
innovation ecosystem.
Objective 1
Support a diversified economy and 
innovation ecosystem
■ Encourage and support a healthy and diverse 
economy grounded in innovation that 
embraces partnerships with post-secondary 
institutions, not-for-profit organizations and 
businesses to further develop Waterloo’s 
globally recognized innovation ecosystem.
■ Suppor
t, invest and collaborate with the 
growing post-secondary institutions through 
continued and new partnerships that advance 
our collective strategic priorities. Leverage 
the strength of the institutions’ problem 
solvers and leaders to find creative solutions 
that address complex community needs 
and challenges.
■ Colla
borate with community partners on 
workforce development to help attract and 
retain diverse talent.
Objective 2
Partner for social innovation
■ Identify opportunities and advocate for new 
and accessible health care services, including a 
new hospital in Waterloo Region.
■ Colla
borate with social enterprises to advance 
the City’s strategic priorities, in association 
with for-profit entities and post-secondary 
institutions.
■ Implement a
 nd build on the recommendations 
of Waterloo Region’s Community Safety and 
Wellbeing Plan framework and other related 
action plans.
Objective 3
Digital opportunities for the future
■ Identify and evaluate digital opportunities for 
services with an intent to improve customer 
service and ensure coordination across 
the organization.
■ Align digit
 al service projects and programs with 
inclusion efforts, prioritizing accessibility for all 
residents in the community.
--- Page 25 ---
Measuring 
our success
--- Page 26 ---
PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT 26
Performance Measurement
Performance measurement is 
a diagnostic tool that focuses 
on energy, attention and effort, 
helping to support the City’s 
commitment to its guiding 
principles and strategic priorities. 
Throughout the life cycle of 
the strategic plan Council, staff 
and community members will 
seek to evaluate the quality and 
effectiveness of the City’s ability 
to implement the strategic plan. 
Through an annual strategic plan 
progress report staff can apply 
an implementation framework 
and determine the best ways to 
implement the strategic plan.
Strategic Plan Progress Report
The strategic plan provides a road map for 
Council, staff and members of the community by 
identifying strategic priorities for the new term 
of Council. It is important that a performance 
measurement framework is designed to measure 
and monitor the City’s progress on implementing 
the strategic plan. Implementation of the strategic 
plan will be done through a variety of actions 
including:
■ 2024-2026 business pla
 nning coordinated with 
the three-year budget;
■ T he application of performance metrics; and
■ An initiativ e called Community Conversations.
The strategic planning process does not end with 
the approval of the strategic plan. It is a process 
that includes a final strategic plan but also focuses 
on how to implement that plan throughout its life 
cycle. Implementation of the strategic plan needs 
to be transparent and include progress reporting 
which reflects the work of all departments 
and divisions to implement the strategic plan. 
The annual progress report will include three 
components that all connect to create the new 
performance measurement framework for the 
City’s strategic plan.
Business plans are developed by each department 
and division in the City. The 2024-2026 Business 
Plans will be approved in early 2024 and will 
implement the strategic plan and align with the 
three-year budget.
The first component of the progress report will 
include the status of business plan initiatives which 
allows the City to identify possible barriers to 
progress and takes a solutions-oriented approach. 
Business plan initiatives will be categorized to 
represent actions that are completed, on track, 
delayed or on hold.
■ Completed – T
 hese initiatives have been 
completed as per identified targets in the 
business plan.
■ On T rack – These initiatives have progressed 
on schedule and are on track to be completed 
as per identified targets in the business plan.
■ Dela
yed – These initiatives are still in progress 
but have been delayed for various reasons.
■ On Hold – T hese initiatives have not been 
started or have been stopped due to specific 
reasons and there is a high probability the 
initiative will not move forward.
--- Page 27 ---
The second component of the annual progress 
report will focus on defined indicators and targets. 
These indicators and targets are used to identify 
opportunities for additional focus or targeted 
resources. Staff are exploring how the indicators 
and targets used as part of the United Nations 
SDGs can contribute to progress reporting. The 
indicators and targets are being discussed and will 
be determined in the months following approval 
of the strategic plan.
The third and final component of the progress 
report will be focused on Community 
Conversations to introduce a strong human 
element to the reporting framework. It is vital 
that implementation of the strategic plan not 
solely be measured according to tangible data. 
The City’s strategic plan process was rooted in 
deep and meaningful engagement with a focus 
on equity-deserving groups and staff want to 
ensure the new strategic plan is a starting point 
for continuing conversations. These sessions 
will be themed around each of the five strategic 
priority areas. 
Each session will include people from the 
community that have a vested interest in each 
of the strategic priority areas. Community 
Conversations will be a joint effort with Council, 
staff and willing members of the community for 
ongoing discussion of how the City can continue 
to work to meet the needs of all members of the 
community. The progress report will provide an 
overview of the Community Conversations and 
the feedback received through the sessions.
In addition to engaging the overall community 
throughout the process, the City also engaged 
with staff. This engagement was focused 
on reflecting on what staff is most proud 
of, determining areas of focus for the City 
and sharing ideas on what to share with the 
community in terms of the work the City does. 
The feedback received from staff will play an 
important role in the Community Conversations 
and will be an opportunity to share the work that 
the City is doing with respect to each strategic 
priority area and how the City is implementing 
the strategic plan.
The City’s strategic plan 
process was rooted in deep and 
meaningful engagement with a 
focus on equity-deserving groups 
and staff want to ensure the new 
strategic plan is a starting point 
for continuing conversations. 
PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT 27
--- Page 28 ---
www.waterloo.ca/strategicplan
City of Waterloo Strategic Plan / 2023–2026
